Short-term roadmap for Coq (#69)
coq/ceps: text/069-coq-roadmap.md

- 1 year

#### Rewrite rules

The goal is to add (unsafe) user-defined rewrite rules. This features allows
users to add computation rules to axioms which can be useful for prototyping.
It also allows for different kinds of computation rules with respect to what Coq
currently permits: non-linearity, overlapping left-hand sides (*eg* one can write
an addition on natural numbers that reduces on both sides: `0 + n` and `n + 0`
both reducing to `n`).

It would be deactivated by default and be optionally on by *eg* setting
`Rewrite Rules On`. They should be supported by unification and the main
reduction machines (not `vm_compute` and `native_compute` for now, Coq
should give a warning when those are used with rewrite rules on). Rewrite
rules would propagate to any module that requires the module that defines them.

- Working Coq fork: https://github.com/Yann-Leray/coq (examples in
https://github.com/Yann-Leray/coq/blob/rewrite-rules/test-suite/success/rewrule.v).
- CEP: https://github.com/coq/ceps/pull/50
- Yann Leray, Théo Winterhalter
- 3 to 6 month

#### Primitive projections

Debate on the design to be had between Hugo Herbelin and Pierre-Marie Pédrot.

### Surface language

> #### Ltac2

Reviewer: Not sure what there is to say about this.

Author: We should I think at the very least try to clarify the objective of the current effort. E.g., make Ltac2 a realistic drop-in replacement for Ltac or whatever by providing fixes and minor improvements based on user feedback (it's better if it's your vision and Pierre-Marie's here rather than mine). What is your vision for the future of Ltac/Ltac2 for the next few years?

Reviewer 2: I see "The goal is to get to the point where we can recommend new developments be Ltac2 only (no Ltac1)."  Is this new since the comment (and thus this thread can be resolved), or are you looking for something beyond that?

Author: This is new. I think it is both insufficiently detailed, and OK as a first step. But yes, let's mark this thread as resolved.

- Title: Coq roadmap

- Drivers: Nicolas Tabareau (@tabareau), Théo Zimmermann (@Zimmi48)

----

# Summary

This CEP aims to establish a roadmap for the Coq project.
It highlights both:

> - what are considered as important axes to work on in the future,

Reviewer 3: What I see so far is a list of things that people plan to work on.  This is a useful planning tool.  But there's really no discussion about the priorities, relative priorities or why something is considered a priority.  We should discuss the best ways to make Coq more useful to users without limiting it to things that people plan to work on in the near future.  For example, I think there are a lot of very useful improvements to make to GUIs such as vsCoq2 that require support from Coq.  Documentation needs a lots of work.

Seems like this should be a separate document and a different kind of discussion.

Author: We want to map the priorities in terms of need with the individual priorities in terms of volunteering effort. But the second section (better names welcome for the sections!) is precisely meant to also discuss priorities without committed volunteer effort (and then we can use this second section to ask Inria for engineering support).

Reviewer 3: > We want to map the priorities in terms of need with the individual priorities in terms of volunteering effort.

Not entirely sure what you mean here.  There should be a place where we begin by stating user needs/priorities, then relating line items to the themes identified there and identifying which ones benefit users most and why.  The technical work should flow from user needs and priorities.  We're leaving them unstated and perhaps undiscussed.  But I think the team is not used to thinking this way.

Maybe we come back to this later.  If you like, I could provide a paragraph or two to fit into the document.

Author: >Maybe we come back to this later.

Yes, let's improve the process step by step.

> If you like, I could provide a paragraph or two to fit into the document.

Yes, sure. I would be interested in reading what you have in mind here.

> - what resources are available to work on these axes, and which axes we commit

Author: No, the roadmap is not limited to what the core team is going to work on. However, there should always be sufficient agreement or support from relevant maintainers to ensure that a change, if implemented, will also be included.

  to work on based on these resources.

Resources mean availability of persons to conduct the work. For technical axes,
requiring changes in the Coq system, it includes availability of persons to
review and merge the changes.

# Motivation

Producing a roadmap for the Coq project is important for several reasons:

- It helps the community to know what to expect from the Coq project in the
  future, in particular what changes can reasonably be expected to become
  part of next releases, and what changes are more likely to be delayed
  because of lack of resources.

- It helps Coq developers to focus on important axes, and to be more
  efficient, by making sure that their work will be supported by other
  developers, including reviewers.

> - It helps contributors to know what are the important axes where their
>   contribution is most likely to be welcome and where they can expect
>   the most support from the Coq developers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- It helps contributors to know in what areas their
  contribution is likely to get
  the most support from the Coq developers.
```

@Zimmi48 It seems unnecessary to use "welcome" at all.  Also, IMHO "axes" is a strange word choice.  It suggests that items are independent (orthogonal?), but that is probably not always the case.

> 

Reviewer 3: I expect most contributors are motivated by their own ideas for improvements to the Coq and its ecosystem rather than asking "what project in this list do I want to join?".  This document is only a limited subset of the potential areas (axes?) for improvement.

> what are the important axes where their contribution is most likely to be welcome

Implying that some contributions are unwelcome is a poor choice of words.  I think the issue is more about getting reviewer time.  We should be willing to consider thoughtfully updating the roadmap at any time.  We should make a reasonable effort to review contributions that arrive unexpectedly--discussing their value rather than just pointing to the roadmap and saying "It's not in the roadmap.  Sorry but your contribution is unwelcome".

Author: > I expect most contributors are motivated by their own ideas for improvements to the Coq and its ecosystem rather than asking "what project in this list do I want to join?". This document is only a limited subset of the potential areas (axes?) for improvement.

If contributors are motivated by their own ideas for improvements, that's fine (although they should check with the maintainers if their ideas are likely to be accepted, when these ideas require large implementation work). However, there are also lots of contributors who are eager to help on priority axes (where they also know that they will receive the most help / feedback).

> This document is only a limited subset of the potential areas (axes?) for improvement.

We should strive to not limit the document in terms of general areas of improvement. However, we should limit the document to just a few priority items by area, because having too many priorities is just like having no priority.

> Implying that some contributions are unwelcome is a poor choice of words. I think the issue is more about getting reviewer time.

Yes. Better wording welcome!

> We should be willing to consider thoughtfully updating the roadmap at any time.

Yes. We discussed this at a recent Coq Call. We said that probably the roadmap would be copied to the wiki and updated there. We should make sure to add relevant pointers here when this is the case.

>We should make a reasonable effort to review contributions that arrive unexpectedly--discussing their value rather than just pointing to the roadmap and saying "It's not in the roadmap. Sorry but your contribution is unwelcome".

Yes. We should review all contributions that we receive. However, we should also make every effort to clearly communicate to potential contributors that large implementation works should not be started before the overall goal and design having been discussed with the maintainer (in an issue or a CEP).

Reviewer 3: > However, we should also make every effort to clearly communicate to potential contributors that large implementation works should not be started before the overall goal and design having been discussed with the maintainer (in an issue or a CEP).

Yeah, but I'd phrase this more like "We encourage potential contributors to discuss their large planned contributions before they begin implementation, such as through a Github issue or a CEP."

Author: > > However, we should also make every effort to clearly communicate to potential contributors that large implementation works should not be started before the overall goal and design having been discussed with the maintainer (in an issue or a CEP).
> 
> Yeah, but I'd phrase this more like "We encourage potential contributors to discuss their large planned contributions before they begin implementation, such as through a Github issue or a CEP."

Yes, although I would probably use a word that has a similar meaning to "encourage", but stronger.

Reviewer 4: "we urge" seems appropriate in this case.

Author: > "we urge" seems appropriate in this case.

Thanks, that's what I was looking for.

discussion with the community, as part of the CEP process.

The fact that an item is part of the roadmap does not mean that its design
is already fixed, as design can be part of the work to be done. Therefore,
disagreement can still arise on such items, and may require to be resolved
through PR reviews, or through the CEP process. However, if an item is
part of the roadmap, it means that the Coq developers are committed to
work on it, and that they have resources available to do so, including the
reviews, so the work should not stall because of lack of resources or lack
of interest.

The description of each item of the roadmap will include the available
resources, the expected duration of the work, and the expected outcome,
including any blocking issues that will need to be resolved to complete
the work, and any still unresolved questions to be answered.

Rules :

- An item cannot be part of the roadmap if it is not supported by at least
  two persons, including at least one Coq maintainer to review the changes.
- No one should be committed to work on more than two items at the same time.

Each Coq Call will start with a roundtable about progress on items of the

> roadmap.

Reviewer 3: I suggest having developers break down their multi-month projects into a list of shorter tasks, each of which can ideally be _fully completed_ in a couple of weeks.  Very hard otherwise to tell how much progress is being made.  Items on the list can be checked off in the document as they're completed.

Author: Yes. This is a good suggestion. We are slowly changing the culture here, so I'm unwilling to make this a hard requirement (this is already difficult enough to get people to write what they have in mind), but I would definitely want to strive toward that.

being tied to Coq, (mis)leading users to consider them as the only
officially recommended libraries.

In particular, we should:

- Identify consistent stdlib components that can be used independently
  from each other and that would be worth distributing as separate
  packages. Identify their maintainers and give them freedom to define
  the future of the components they maintain, in the limits set by the
  Coq Platform charter. Allow maintainers to extract stdlib components
  to maintain and evolve them outside the core Coq repository and to have
  their own release schedule and versioning scheme, in case they wish to
  do so.

- Extract the prelude + a minimum set of components that alternative
  general libraries like MathComp and coq-stdpp need as a basis.
  Make sure that this reduced core stdlib component can evolve to allow
  other libraries to use newer features of Coq (like universe polymorphism,
  SProp and primitive projections).
  Stop including any other stdlib components as part of the `coq` opam
  package and encourage maintainers of Coq packages in other distributions
  to do the same.

Resources:

- Cyril Cohen, Pierre Roux

> - 6 months to 1 year

Reviewer 2: My intuition (lacking any evidence) is that this will
a. make Coq less friendly for beginners, 
b. make the ecosystem less coherent as a whole, and 
c. lead to more duplication of effort across projects.
The upsides of 
e. boosting the apparent relative level of recognition of existing popular libraries and 
f. allowing faster development cycles for library components,
do not seem worth the downsides to me.  (Am I missing some upsides?)  I would rather see Coq move in the direction of Isabelle's AFP (and insofar as the platform does this, that seems good, but it seems to me that at the moment, moving content from the standard library to platform packages is a move away from this?).

Some anecdata:
- I often see small Agda projects defining nat, eq, prod, sigT, etc, by hand, because installing the external stdlib package adds a bit of overhead.  I think it would be quite unfortunate if Coq moved in this direction.
- when I first started working with reals and floats in Coq, I found it confusing to navigate the tower of external dependencies around them.  The fact that (definable) Boolean equality on reals is defined in (IIRC) Flocq's Raux module rather than Coq's stdlib seems like a wart to me, and I'd rather see it upsteamed into the stdlib.  Or if this is not the recommended way of doing reals, I'd rather see the existing content deprecated and replaced with whatever construction is the recommended way of doing reals.  As a user of real arithmetic mostly interested in using basic facts like `a <= b -> 0 <= c -> a * c <= b * c` as well as the connection with primitive floats, I don't want to have to consider multiple alternatives, I want to rely on the community wisdom about which solutions are good defaults
- This point is minor, because it mostly only impacts me, AIUI, the platform relies essentially on opam, which makes it unsuitable for my personal use case (opam does not support installing multiple versions of Coq in parallel on the same OCaml version without duplicating OCaml and all its packages, and I don't have 50 GB to spare for duplicated OCaml binaries), and I'd rather it not get harder for me personally to use basic Coq definitions and results

Reviewer 5: > Am I missing some upsides?

There is one missing upside indeed: a separate stdlib allows to take advantage of external packages such as Equations, or HB to develop more structured applications. Of course there is always the possibility to drag those back in too, and that would lead to a monorepo approach... Why not? But I thought this was the point of the Coq platform to achieve this.

Reviewer 2: > Among the work on promoting the Coq Platform, we should work at making it available not just in opam (but also Docker images, Nix, Debian -- where it's almost already the case --, etc.).

I would be happy with a `.sh` script that installed Coq and the Coq packages I specify to a prefix of my choosing, using an OCaml I already have installed via opam, without touching my opam distribution.  (Maybe this already exists?)  (Should I move this discussion to the platform repo?)

Author: > I would be happy with a `.sh` script that installed Coq and the Coq packages I specify to a prefix of my choosing, using an OCaml I already have installed via opam, without touching my opam distribution. (Maybe this already exists?) (Should I move this discussion to the platform repo?)

This seems like a reasonable request in theory, but it is made difficult by the variety of build systems found in Coq Platform packages. The situation should improve if there is a convergence around Dune as a build system or if progress is made on using Dune as a package manager (with the ability to use its cache for OCaml). Since your use case is very specific, though, I would be interested in discussing with you (somewhere else) why Nix wouldn't be a good fit for your use case.

Reviewer 6: > a. make Coq less friendly for beginners,

Could you elaborate? Note that currently, the stdlib is, for historical reasons, a mix of state of the art modules and things whose use is strongly discouraged by Coq developers themselves. This is unfriendly for beginners, who may legitimately think that being in the stdlib means "recommended best solution".

> b. make the ecosystem less coherent as a whole, and
> c. lead to more duplication of effort across projects.

Having smaller packages could also make it easier for users to share common alternatives by helping such alternatives to become popular. So this could also reduce duplication.

> I would rather see Coq move in the direction of Isabelle's AFP

My understanding (which might be completely wrong) is that the AFP is more a library to preserve things (think library of Congress) than a place to actively develop things. It seems to me that the ability to independently develop libraries and mix them through some package manager (OPAM or Nix for instance) has been a huge progress in easing/enabling Coq code developments in the last decade. A move to monorepo would just feel like a dramatic step backward to the stdlib/user-contrib era (but I might be wrong / am too young to have seriously experienced that time).

> nat, eq, prod, sigT

Those are in the prelude so out of the question here.

> when I first started working with reals and floats in Coq, I found it confusing to navigate the tower of external dependencies around them.

Which tower? Flocq has no external dependencies.

> The fact that (definable) Boolean equality on reals is defined in (IIRC) Flocq's Raux module rather than Coq's stdlib seems like a wart to me, and I'd rather see it upsteamed into the stdlib.

The very fact that the module is called `Raux` indeed means it is intended to be backported but this takes time / can sometimes be forgotten. Having a more actively developped Real library could certainly help (supporting less Coq versions in Flocq master would also help but that's another question).

> I want to rely on the community wisdom about which solutions are good defaults

Note that having the stdlib split into miningfull packages, not released with Coq could only help considering things like Flocq as "regular good default" rather than "external dependency".

> opam does not support installing multiple versions of Coq in parallel on the same OCaml version without duplicating OCaml

As already noted by Théo I would naively think that functional package managers like Nix are, by design, doing that sharing.

Author: >A move to monorepo would just feel like a dramatic step backward to the stdlib/user-contrib era (but I might be wrong / am too young to have seriously experienced that time).

Note that the monorepo solution would not be an alternative that's impossible to work with, but it would make some things significantly more complicated, in particular:

- having separate release schedules for separate components
- having separate teams with their own processes for separate components (in particular, how to support different rules regarding merging pull requests, how to have separate contributing guidelines for separate components, etc.)

Reviewer 7: @Zimmi48  I understand the flexibility you describe would be valuable to developers, but I worry that the associated costs to the users outweigh it. The Coq platform (as it exists right now) is *much less* cohesive than the standard library, and while the stdlib also has issues, at least these issues are decently well understood. It is hard to see how the cohesion of coq platform developments would be improved under the low-synchronization development process you envision.

Personally, I feel motivated to contribute to (parts of) stdlib exactly because they are accepted as the definition of relevant concepts in Coq. Nothing else in Coq platform enjoys this status right now as far as I know. The inclusion of mathcomp, math-classes, and stdpp clearly shows that cohesion has not been a priority. (Sure, these libraries *can* be used together, but even experienced users dread trying to do so.) Currently, I feel comfortable telling younger engineers I mentor to use stdlib, except for maps, sets, and vectors; telling somebody to use coq platform doesn't feel more confidence-inspiring than directing them to stack overflow or a search engine. In short, the (relative) quality and curation of stdlib outweighs the advantages of a larger quantity of work available in the coq platform.

From a technical perspective, the CI infrastructure seems essential for refactoring future-stdlib for better cohesion. I don't think there is anything comparable for coq platform right now.

From a social perspective, Coq already suffers from a lack of consistent decision-making and reliable leadership. This is somewhat inherent to a largely volunteer-staffed project, but I don't think anyone would argue that this is not a problem. Leaving curation of the library to maintainers of individual coq-platform-development maintainers would make interface-relevant tradeoffs (e.g., how much elaboration to rely on and which mechanism to use) up to arbitrary decisions. I think a great example of how this has played out recently in non-proof-oriented programming languages is Go's excellent and extensive standard library, and probably the most similar negative example is Rust's offering of three almost-capable crates for each desired functionality.

I also generally share the other concerns Jason raised and would have even more to say myself. But before I go on: is my input actually relevant here?

Author: > I also generally share the other concerns Jason raised and would have even more to say myself. But before I go on: is my input actually relevant here?

Yes, it is. Please feel free to express it.

At this stage (still a draft PR), we were more collecting the description of various items, but the goal of going through a CEP for this roadmap is indeed to enable all stakeholders to voice their opinion or concerns. Note that any stakeholder (so any user) is welcome to express themselves here, but as you are also a stdlib maintainer, it is even more important that we take your feedback under consideration.

- Emilio Jésus Gallego Arias, ??? (missing buddy)

#### Removing clenv

#### Unifall

#### Unification heuristics

(improving evarconv)

#### Support for async tactics

#### Reactive elaboration

#### Functionalisation

### Libraries and community

#### Promote the Coq Platform

The Coq Platform is already the officially recommended installation method.
We would like to make it clear to users that they are encouraged to rely on
the packages that it provides, and that libraries in the Platform should be
generally considered as a collaborative extended standard library for Coq
(the historical stdlib being only a part of this).

As part of this effort we should do:

- Editorial work for curation of packages included in the Coq Platform
  (to bring guarantees on their level of quality).

- Consolidation of documentation, so that it is easy for users to find
  documentation about the included packages, ideally with a consistent
  presentation.

- Infrastructure / automation work to stabilize the release process of
  the Coq Platform and ensure that releases are more consistently
  delivered according to a predefined schedule.

#### Tooling for building libraries

> 

Reviewer 3: How about listing improvements to the Ltac* debugger?  I have several significant enhancements already complete.  Only a couple more features to complete, cleanup and doc.  It may be ready to present to the group in a month or less.

Author: Feel free to contribute additional items like this one to this list. If items have a single person committed to them, they should appear in the second part, until they get at least a committed reviewer.

Note however that improvements to the debugger (if they are CoqIDE-oriented) risk clashing with some other goals that are likely to get on the roadmap to eventually retire CoqIDE. Adding debugger support to one of the language servers would then become a much higher priority than improving the debugger, IMHO.

(Coq universe)

# Drawbacks

TODO

# Alternatives

TODO

# Unresolved questions

- How to update the roadmap? Should this CEP be updated, or should we create new CEPs every few months to produce a new roadmap? Should we

> also maintain a wiki page with the roadmap, to cover the live progress?

Reviewer 3: Ideally, it would be versioned.  Might be interesting to diff between versions.

Author: As mentioned above, what we currently envision is to copy and update the roadmap to the wiki, which is versioned as a git repository.

  more resources.

# Detailed design

The Coq roadmap is declined at three levels: short, medium and long term.
Each of these levels address different needs, but they should be checked
for consistency with each other.

- The short term roadmap is focused on priorities on which we are committed
  to progress in the coming months and that are thus the most likely to
  actually happen. We define a commitment from the Coq team as a commitment
  of several (at least two) contributors, including at least one relevant
  maintainer to review the work proposed by other contributors. The work
  can include implementation work when the design is already clear, work on
  the design from ideas that are well understood, or even exploratory work,
  but we should only list the parts that are likely to converge in the
  specified time-frame (i.e., if it is not clear if exploratory work will
  lead to a solution that can be implemented, we should only commit on the
  exploratory work).

- The medium term roadmap is focused on areas where we see important progress
  being needed, which could take several years to complete, and for which we

>   do not always have the ressources needed. It is used to guide the renewal

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  do not always have the resources needed. It is used to guide the renewal
```

Maybe call this simply "unresourced improvements" instead of "medium term roadmap"?  I'm sure there are many unresourced tasks that won't require "several years to complete".

  of the short term roadmap, but also the search for new resources to make
  progress in these areas. The medium term roadmap should contains high level
  descriptions of the areas requiring progress, but can contain rough plans
  for how to proceed to make progress in these areas if the team already has a
  vision about the steps needed.

- The long term roadmap is focused on what our vision for the future of Coq is
  and not necessarily how we are going to achieve it. It is used to provide
  general ideas that we can check our medium and short term roadmaps against,
  and to give users more clarity on what the future of Coq could look like. It

>   should include our vision of what kind of users Coq will target in the future.

Reviewer 3: I think these thoughts are out of place.  We should eventually state the goals for Coq and describe some of the principal user groups.  Then items in the roadmap fit into those goals.  That should earlier in the document, maybe at the beginning of the motivation section.  But maybe not fleshed out in any detail in this version of the roadmap.

#### Rewrite rules

The goal is to add (unsafe) user-defined rewrite rules. This features allows users to add computation rules to axioms which can be useful for prototyping. It also allows for different kinds of computation rules with respect to what Coq currently permits: non-linearity, overlapping left-hand sides (*eg* one can write an addition on natural numbers that reduces on both sides: `0 + n` and `n + 0` both reducing to `n`).

It would be deactivated by default and be optionally on by *eg* setting `Rewrite Rules On`. They should be supported by unification and the main reduction machines (not `vm_compute` and `native_compute` for now, Coq should give a warning when those are used with rewrite rules on). Rewrite rules would propagate to any module that requires the module that defines them.

> - Working Coq fork: https://github.com/Yann-Leray/coq (examples in https://github.com/Yann-Leray/coq/blob/rewrite-rules/test-suite/success/rewrule.v).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Working Coq fork: https://github.com/Yann-Leray/coq (examples in
https://github.com/Yann-Leray/coq/blob/rewrite-rules/test-suite/success/rewrule.v).
```

#### Promote the Coq Platform

The Coq Platform is already the officially recommended installation method.
We would like to make it clear to users that they are encouraged to rely on
the packages that it provides, and that libraries in the Platform should be
generally considered as a collaborative extended standard library for Coq
(the historical stdlib being only a part of this).

As part of this effort we should do:

- Editorial work for curation of packages included in the Coq Platform
  (to bring guarantees on their level of quality).

- Consolidation of documentation, so that it is easy for users to find

>   documentation about the included packages, ideally with a consistant

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  documentation about the included packages, ideally with a consistent
```

>   presentation.

Reviewer 3: Would be great if opam-installing a package could include its documentation and coqdoc (whether the package is in the platform or not) and then have an easy way to access the doc from the GUI.

Also look at ways to enhance coqdoc to make it more useful.
